Yes, well you see, although we look back on the English and the Welsh, particularly in
Monmouthshire, it is bone-filt in Canada to be able to understand the Welsh, even if you
couldn't speak it too well, to understand it, and also the English, because as I say,
my mother spoke very little English, my father spoke very little Welsh, although he was a
self-educated man and a good man, and he could sing Welsh like all the rest of us, and he
could sing French and we could sing Russian, but we don't understand after time what do
you sing. Now when it came to that, we used to play tricks on my mother, she would, if we didn't
want to do what she wanted us to do, she'd speak to us in Welsh and we'd answer her in English,
and all kinds of tricks like that, and we didn't understand what she was saying if it was something
that we didn't want to do, but these are the things that in later life that you look back on
and say well when your own children try to do the same thing as you, say well I don't understand,
we don't understand what you mean, so but we used to use it in reverse, that when we wanted
something from my mother, then we'd speak to her in Welsh and she'd give us the whole world,
you see this is the value of even of bilingual, particularly in the Welsh and English where we
were. Now after I came out here, there was an unfortunate situation in Canada of depression
well the depression that they had here was to me, was to us, some of us, it was still heaven,
considering what we had gone through in 1921 and 1926, the depression yet in the 30s was
was nothing compared to what we had gone through and how we had to live, but there was what served me
when you asked about Dean Welsh,
while they were building Eaton's building here in 1929 and the starting of the best hotel,
there was a sign on the contractors had a sign
on it, men wanted no Englishman need apply, so I was around with a few Englishmen, a couple of us
Welshmen, a few more Welsh than Scotsmen and they said well that's a funny sign, well I said that
doesn't make any difference to me, so I said I'll go over, so I went over to the office and I said
you're looking for men, well what can you do, I told them anything anybody else can do, I can do,
but I see you've got a notice out there, he said well you're English aren't you,
don't you know, and then I spoke to him in a bit of Welsh, I said no I'm not an Englishman,
I'm a Welshman, so I got a job, you see just for a few days because the conditions on there were so
you was better off without the job than you was with the job, this is what they call a depression
in Canada, this is what I learned from a depression, a depression is something that is created
where although you work you're better off not working, that's what the depression is,
because you could get a couple of meals a day you know from different places as a
salvaging army or something and this is a fact, this is a fact even after I got a job for the
city of Saskatoon, I sat down with people who were on relief with identically the same family that
I had and worked out what they paid in rent and what I paid in rent and what I bought
and they were better off than me and I was working 10 and 12 hours a day, seven days a week
for the city of Saskatoon, so you see
but I had one thing, I wasn't taking charity and that was one thing that I found out about
our people, the Welsh people when we came, we'd do anything but take the charity
because we were dead against charity because it was over the hill to the porters as far as we were
concerned, so these are some of the things when then they say as the first thing I said,
well you're Welsh, well you must be a good singer, well the only, when they ask you why are all
Welsh people good singers, well all Welsh people are not good singers, that's for sure, that's the
myth and the other one is that if you want to be a good singer you've got to put in a lot of practice
and the reason, the only reason that I know is because Welsh people sing a lot, they put in a lot
of practice whether they actually go to a music teacher or whether they go to the choir or whether
they sing together on the street corner but the football game, things they don't do you, if the
Canadians were to do what the Welsh people do, some of their customs and this is what, this is
another reason why I'd like to see the culture broader, when you go to a football game, sing,
sing at the football game, I know this is spreading to Europe now and into England and Scotland
but it's thing at the game, when we go to another concert, you go to a concert, everybody sits there
either smoking or something, nobody starts up a song, you know, but only some of the Welsh
group will get together, we'll get together and go to a club, go to a legion club, who do you find
whether it's two Welsh people together, a choir sort of thing and it's proven here
and when you go away, when you're traveling, if you're getting with the Welsh people you sing
you see and I think these, this is the reason that the Welsh people are singing but Canadians
could be just as good as singers because a lot of old people can't read music, they don't know one
note from another but they learn off the person who's singing alongside them and if you sing long
enough you'll learn it and that's what I think is the one of the reasons why we should retain our
culture because singing, as I say in my opinion, singing has only in the last 200 years been a
culture with the Welsh people, has become prominent as a culture, there's no doubt about it that it was
there from time immemorial, this community either chanting together or praying together or singing
together has always been a part of our culture and I think that's what we should try and retain
because we, I don't know, I know when I brought the Welsh society when they asked me to say grace
one time I sang the grace and everybody said that's the first time we'd heard that for years,
you see, we sang the grace
praise God from whom all blessings flow
praise him all creatures here below praise him above in heavenly host
praise father son and holy ghost
be present at our table lord be here and everywhere adored
these mercies bless and grant that we may feast in paradise with thee
you see they don't do that anymore but we used to sing it every meal at home when we were children
when we were children would you sing it in English or in Welsh at home?
We'd say it mostly in English but sometimes in Wales all I could do was there, you know,
and in Wales where we were the visitor always had the choice of the grace
if there was someone came to our house for supper we'd ask them to say the grace, I used to say
because the reason for that was we knew ours let's learn theirs and there was this surprise
in how many different ways they were of blessing, you know, blessing the food and
these are the things that are missing now too we've lost all those we very rarely say grace in ours now
but the funny part about this when the children come that's the time we say it we don't say it
if it's adults but when the grandchildren come I we do so we have tried but it's it's a lot of
things that that that enter into it at the festival again I would like to have seen you know a couple
of our children or children dressed in Welsh costumes. Which festival? The music festival
in Saskatchewan. You get on and like when when the Queen comes and things like that, you know,
should I tell you about the incident with the Queen?
The wife and I had an invitation down to from the Premier to meet the Queen in Regina a year
ago now July the 4th last year and I thought it was only 12 lunch so we had lunch and then after
the lunch he came around on the walk around and the Premier was with him we were the first couple
he walked across to and he said she said he said this is Mr Thayne and this is Mr Thayne she wanted
to know what I was from I told her from old Regina and wanted to know what I had been doing and I
told her I'm an organiser with the unions and now that I was with the senior citizens of Pantone
the Premier and we stopped and talked for for quite a while she was quite interested and
you see they you you seem to send something out
I don't know whether I'm an unusual but I find it a lot among a lot of old people
we built a self-confidence within ourselves and I think this I think this is good and
this is what we should to meet the Queen you know lots of people said after her
to meet the Queen I respect her in a position I hope she respects me that's all I that's all I
ask from anybody my you know and I didn't fall over any chairs or anything else or scrabble
she speaks to me I speak to her she doesn't doesn't make any difference to me but these are the things
I think that that the Welsh people are losing and losing fast is that Welsh people have a terrific
amount of self-confidence as a nation they believe they can do everything anything and everything
we proved it in the armies in the with the with the Welsh regiments in the war if there was
anything to be done they'd do it they'd do it and I think that is one of the basic things of the
Welsh people when they take their when they're convinced that the thing to do is right what
they're going to do is right they'll do it you see and I think that's a part of our culture that is
is knowing the right from the wrong and we learned very young what was right from wrong the people
today I don't think often know the doings been right or wrong they're supposed to know what is
right and what is wrong but they don't know I think that's the problem but but I think the Welsh culture
was a part of that
you know you think for yourself to find out what you think it is right or wrong of course if you're
wrong you're pretty soon told but and is it good is it good that's the I think that's
all of my life anyway and all of the people that I've run into
with Welsh background or Welsh people is is is it for the good is it is it good if it's good
they'll be I did and if you look down through the people Welsh people in Canada and find out
the positions they held the jobs they've done after they've got them you know their life
it'll support it'll support what I say and now we've got to go on and build the new group
the new group then are the children of Welsh people who respect their Welsh background
to get an opportunity to speak their language be able to speak their language and know something
of the culture I think that that's the next move otherwise not only in Canada you're going to die
but it'll die in there but the fight is on over there I understand for the Welsh language to come
back in the school I don't want to see all and only Welsh language that'd be the most ridiculous
thing to do because the whole world is going to be anglicized before as far as that goes but we've
got to have these other languages on the side I know as much French as I do Welsh because
I've been in that environment but you learn it from the people because you want to converse
them they want to converse them you can converse with people if you want to but I'd like to be able
to converse with the with the Welsh people and I wouldn't want to teach Welsh language
just for the sake of saying well let's go in the corner and and and talk Welsh
because that's what's ruined some of the societies and that's what causes the division
is the few who can speak Welsh getting together and speaking Welsh in one corner
and ignoring the others that's one of the biggest problems that we had and that's what broke our
Welsh society there was no doubt about that was the ones who could speak Welsh would get together
and you know conduct half the business in Welsh and half in English so these are there are dangers
mine and that's one of the dangers you could split the group up that's what have broken up
the German groups here is because there was there was two there was the high and the low Germans and
they'd get together and they'd speak even among themselves speaking German without a fellow like
me dropping in and speaking English
interview between Lewis Thomas and W.E. Davis of Regina on September the 1st 1970
okay an interview do you mind telling me how old you are Mr. Davis? I'm 75. 75 so you were
I was a little over seven when we came to this country when you came to the banger area well
not banger there was no banger that existed when we came here you see I see the railway that's there
now there was it was talked about but it it started it came through there in 1907
ah yes I see that's when banger first came see that district that is known as banger today
was first known as St. David ah yes yes in St. David there's the St. David school there that's
one of the school districts school districts and the St. David Anglican church there and that was
there before bangalore that's how early I think that was in established somewhere between four
and ninety four or five I believe ah yes so I'm not certain of that yes but uh during that time
there was that district was first known as St. David not Bangalore I see well that's very interesting
yes so you were born in Patagonia yes I was born there yes and uh were your parents um
among the first in Patagonia or did they come in in the uh in the 70s or 80s
my father was of course my grandparents my father was a little boy he wasn't quite six I see
they were amongst the first the first that came in 1865 1865 yes yes he was amongst the first there
well and like many of these voyages and all it had its tragedies yes
my grandmother father's mother he she died a few weeks after the landing well well and his father
in about two years so he and his brother were left alone I see they're amongst there's no relatives
nobody at all well and they were just left there entirely alone and his master's brother his
brother met with an accident and he was at the age of 14 the father was 12 well so he was entirely
alone from there on yes and my mother's uh they went there well they went they left Wales in 1880
but they didn't arrive in the well said in 81 in the spring of 81 they spent a few
months in outside of Buenos Aires
and my maternal grandfather he was out in BC here came out in 1862 yes they left Wales on December
the 22nd in 1862 of the rising sun I see and they arrived in the square of BC on the 13th of June
1863 well that was journey yes and uh what did he do there was he on the mining yes he went to
prospecting the line up to the caribou yes he was there until 1874 when he returned to Wales
yes I knew there were some Welsh people who went into the prospecting yes there's quite a number
of them and there was one amongst them uh Harry Jones and my mother talking about he was quite
a young man well he he died in Victoria at the age of 95 or 1936 or 1937 I think well and he was
in amongst that group too with my grandfather's he and recently I've been able through this
journal again this year there's an article about him it's Harry Jones and there's a peak named
after him there's Jones peak in the caribou range well the name of the journal to which Mr Davies
is referring is YR capital E N F Y S the journal of the Welsh people outside Wales
the meaning of the title is the rainbow
well now Mr Davies what was your own occupation over the years was it farming farming yes
farming yes and you farmed up until quite recently until well 10 years ago when we had to leave on
he was told to work
oh yes yes um can you tell me anything about the um
from your from hearing people talk about the previous occupations of the settlers who um
who went to Patagonia from Wales were they were there a variety of occupations represented
yes a variety that's I think was one of the big mistakes they're going out there
the idea of farming you know and there's hardly any of them that had any experience in farming at
all they're mostly miners and carpenters and so on but the grandfather he'd been farming of course
Wales before going to somewhere but that was one great disadvantage yeah would you say from your
from hearing people talk that um the settlers were as nationalistic in their feeling as Michael Jones
was and the other organizers of the project well some of them I think well quite nationalistic yes
yeah do you recall the name Lewis Jones oh yes he was from my reading of the records the one who
who did the most to sort of publicize Patagonia in Wales yes he did he was apparently a great
speaker and a clever journalist I have a faint reflection about him you know he was still living
when we left yes and I well I remember seeing him as well but yeah of course of course the father
talking a lot about him the organizers of the colony Michael Jones and Lewis Jones and and their
friends really um had no clear impression of the nature of the country did they and the problems
that would face the settlers well it's apparent that they didn't you know one thing they landed
there in midwinter in july the 28th he was held on the mimosa yeah that's the name of the boat
and two months to the day they left on the 28th day of may 1865 and they landed on this bleak
and barren coast there and july the 28th yeah and they couldn't too late to get a crop in oh
oh yes i was couldn't do anything yeah and see there were 40 miles from the valley and you cross
there and it's still today you can stand on that post today and all you can see is just stones and
and little short bushes we stood on there there's no gentleman there he's passed away recently now
he's in columbia bogota columbia and he stood there and my sister and i was standing there
looked and he looked out at this last you know just desert and he says i've seen enough with
this i don't want to see him he just died recently i had it yeah and he said he died yeah well i know
quite a bit about from my reading about the hardships which the settlers encountered
over the years and
i am interested however in in the situation that developed in the 1890s by by that time as i
understand it the the welch pioneers had proved the
the agricultural potential of the area if water was applied through irrigation oh yes and
the result was they they had proved that it was a productive area and argentinians began to move
into the province and and i guess some italian immigrants by this time too yeah and this created
of course a new situation for the welch didn't it oh yes it did yes yeah
was there was there any intermarriage at that time or has it taken place to any extent since
oh yes to a great extent since yes at that time no matter what they were there for
10 years from 1865 until 1875 before any joined them in that policy they were there for 10 10 years
and that's where there's quite a few making mistakes about this group that came out from
patagonia to canada here they said that they'd spent 37 years there they didn't see there's only
two that came out here in 1902 that had been landed there in 1865 that's my father and then
the mother david hughes but david hughes he returned after five years he returned to south america in
1907 he returned so so we're the only ones the rest of some of them had only been there
i was all of course i would even want my father mother was saying you know that they'd only been
there three or four years some of them they came out to canada some of them had been 10 some of
them had been 15 some of them up to 20 years or more but the only two that came out here
and we were we were trying to find out when we got back there now they weren't able to find
that anybody in canada besides us my sisters and i that have direct descendants if you'll be
in the world
now of the group that that came to canada there were two there were approximately 250
who sailed on that ship were you with that with the main group yes we were that ship well this is
coming to women and children yes well according to a book i haven't got here now with my sister
it's written by a man there on the banks of the tuba
and according to him that was 234 to be exact but we were not all welsh there was
like and he called me two english families and there was one scotsman there and one
and you wouldn't dare say anything about him in english spanish otherwise either
there's one of those english families that came over her children that were
quite a size you know in the 14 and 15 years they speak welsh
well the mother was completely english she was from lancaster and the father was an irishman
they could speak welsh yeah now most of the most of the group who came to canada of course
would have been farming in in patagonia most of them yes there'd perhaps be a few tradesmen
uh
do you recall um whether any serious consideration was given by the group
to settling in the irrigated lands of southern alberta i'm not aware of that at all
it would have uh in some senses seemed a logical place to go because of their experience in that
type of farming yes and similarly of course they had been very successful ranchers your people in
in the schubert area yeah um my guess is that they uh they didn't uh go to southern alberta
because uh irrigation land was costly to acquire and uh the ranches by that time had been largely
broken up into small holdings and there wasn't as much homestead land
available in southern alberta as there was in this part of saskatchewan at the time would you
feel that's a fair uh estimate possibly i don't know i never heard any talk of that at all you
know but if you we came out with saw coats there of course that was as in the way of northwest
yeah and there was a farmer there well he'd been in south america and he'd come to canada
all eight or nine years ahead of us by the name of evan jenkins yes i remember seeing that name
here i think some do with it and well mostly there was four townships had been reserved for
a vals supplement before we came out well after this conversation taking place between the
government of britain and get these out of satagonia you know there
yeah yeah um do you recall uh whether um the settlers felt they had been reasonably well
treated by the canadian authorities in the in the handling of